## This repository contains files that were used for reverse engineering the Samsung Galaxy Tab 2 second stage bootloader (`Sbl.bin`)
- `Sbl.rep` and `Sbl.gpr` are the Ghidra (https://github.com/NationalSecurityAgency/ghidra) project that was used for reverse engineering and patching the bootloader.
- `X-Loader.rep` and `X-Loader.gpr` are the Ghidra project that was used for checking if the X-Loader source code was modified by Samsung or basically the same as the official source code release by Texas Instruments. I discovered that it was basically the same, except from some non default build configurations. I also used this to get the addresses from some functions and variables related to reading a file from a FAT partition and reading from MMC in general, since I used some of these functions later on in the modified second stage bootloader.
- `Sbl_*/` directories contain a patched binary for the GT-P5100 and a bspatch diff file that I tested working with at least the GT-P5110_PHN_1_20131219175220_kduop6lmam and GT-P5113_XAR_1_20131213093640_j4yd9st9cc_fac firmware releases, but this patch file will also probably work with all other releases, since Samsung never really updated the firmware for this device.
- `Sbl_uart/*` only has as a difference from the stock bootloader that UART logging (and input) is enabled via the 30 pin connector.
- `Sbl_uart_external_boot/*` also adds that it will always load everything from the SD card instead of internal storage.
- `Sbl_uart_external_boot_extra_commands/*` also adds the `mmcdev` and `loadkernelfat` commands which can change the MMC device interactively and load the kernel from a FAT partition (handy if you use postmarketOS for example) respectively
- `Sbl_uart_external_boot_extra_commands_default_loadkernelfat/*` executes the `loadkernelfat` command by default instead of the `loadkernel` command. 